source/user/scf.rst, before:

.. _theory_scf:

***********************************
Self-consistent field (SCF) methods
***********************************

*Modules*: :mod:`scf`, :mod:`pbc.scf`, :mod:`soscf`

Introduction
============

Self-consistent field (SCF) methods include both Hartree-Fock (HF) theory
and Kohn-Sham (KS) density functional theory (DFT). Self-consistent
field theories only depend on the electronic density matrices, and are
the simplest level of quantum chemical models. Details that are
specific to DFT can be found in :numref:`theory_dft`.

In both HF and KS-DFT, the ground-state wavefunction is expressed as a
single Slater determinant :math:`\Phi_0` of molecular orbitals (MOs)
:math:`\psi`, :math:`\Phi_0 = \mathcal{A}|\psi_1(1)\psi_2(2) \ldots
\psi_N(N)|`:

.. math::

   |\Phi_0\rangle = \frac{1}{\sqrt{N!}}
   \begin{vmatrix} 
   \psi_1(1) &\psi_2(1) &\dots  &\psi_N(1)\\
   \psi_1(2) &\psi_2(2) &\dots  &\psi_N(2)\\
   \vdots               &\vdots               &\ddots &\vdots\\
   \psi_1(N) &\psi_2(N) &\dots  &\psi_N(N)
   \end{vmatrix} \;.

The total electronic energy
:math:`E=\langle\Psi_0|\hat{H}|\Psi_0\rangle` is then minimized,
subject to orbital orthogonality; this is equivalent to the
description of the electrons as independent particles that only
interact via each others' mean field.

It can be shown that the minimization of the total energy within a
given basis set (see e.g. :cite:`Lehtola2020_M_1218` or any standard
textbook on quantum chemistry like :cite:`SzaOst2012`) leads to the
equation

.. math::

    \mathbf{F} \mathbf{C} = \mathbf{S} \mathbf{C} \mathbf{E}

where :math:`\mathbf{C}` is the matrix of molecular orbital
coefficients, :math:`\mathbf{E}` is a diagonal matrix of the
corresponding eigenenergies, and :math:`\mathbf{S}` is the atomic
orbital overlap matrix. The Fock matrix :math:`\mathbf{F}` is defined
as

.. math::

    \mathbf{F} = \mathbf{T} + \mathbf{V} + \mathbf{J} + \mathbf{K}\;

where :math:`\mathbf{T}` is the kinetic energy matrix,
:math:`\mathbf{V}` is the external potential, :math:`\mathbf{J}` is
the Coulomb matrix, and :math:`\mathbf{K}` is the exchange matrix. 

Initial guess
=============

The Coulomb and exchange matrices depend on the occupied orbitals,
meaning that the SCF equation :math:`\mathbf{F C}=\mathbf{S C E}`
needs to be solved self-consistently by some sort of iterative
procedure, which begins from some initial guess. The accuracy of
several initial guesses for SCF calculations has recently been
assessed in :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`, to which we refer for
detailed discussion on initial guesses.

Several of initial guess have been implemented in PySCF; the used
variant is controlled by the :attr:`.init_guess` attribute of the SCF
solver. The following values are possible

* ``'minao'`` (default)

    Superposition of atomic densities projected in a minimal basis
    obtained from the first contracted functions in the cc-pVTZ or
    cc-pVTZ-PP basis set. The guess orbitals are obtained by
    diagonalizing the Fock matrix that arises from the spin-restricted
    guess density.

* ``'1e'``

    The one-electron guess, also known as the core guess, obtains the
    guess orbitals from the diagonalization of the core Hamiltonian
    :math:`\mathbf{H}_0 = \mathbf{T} + \mathbf{V}`, thereby ignoring
    all interelectronic interactions and the screening of nuclear
    charge. The 1e guess should only be used as a last resort, because
    it is so bad for molecular systems; see
    :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`.

* ``'atom'``

    Superposition of atomic HF density matrices. The atomic HF
    calculations are spin-restricted and employ spherically averaged
    fractional occupations with ground states determined with fully
    numerical calculations at the complete basis set limit in
    :cite:`Lehtola2020_PRA_012516`.

* ``'huckel'``

    This is the parameter-free Hückel guess described in
    :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`, which is based on on-the-fly atomic
    HF calculations that are performed analogously to ``'atom'``. The
    spherically averaged atomic spin-restricted Hartree-Fock
    calculations yield a minimal basis of atomic orbitals and orbital
    energies, which are used to build a Hückel type matrix that is
    diagonalized to obtain guess orbitals.

* ``'vsap'``

    Superposition of atomic potentials as described in
    :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`. Pretabulated, fully numerical
    atomic potentials determined with the approach of
    :cite:`Lehtola2020_PRA_012516` are used to build a guess potential
    on a DFT quadrature grid; this potential is then used to obtain
    the orbitals. Note this option is only available for DFT
    calculations in PySCF.
    
* ``'chk'``

    Read in the orbitals from the checkpoint file and use them as the
    initial guess (see below for more details).

Alternatively, the user can also override the initial guess density
matrix for an SCF calculation through the ``dm0`` argument.  For
example, the following script first computes the HF density matrix for
the :math:`\rm Cr^{6+}` cation, and then uses it as an initial guess
for a HF calculation of the :math:`\rm Cr` atom. ::

    # First calculate the Cr6+ cation
    mol = gto.Mole()
    mol.build(
        symmetry = 'D2h',
        atom = [['Cr',(0, 0, 0)], ],
        basis = 'cc-pvdz',
        charge = 6,
        spin = 0,
    )

    mf = scf.RHF(mol)
    mf.kernel()
    dm1 = mf.make_rdm1()

    # Now switch to the neutral atom in the septet state
    mol.charge = 0
    mol.spin = 6
    mol.build(False,False)

    mf = scf.RHF(mol)
    mf.kernel(dm0=dm1)

More examples can be found in
:source:`examples/scf/15-initial_guess.py`, and
:source:`examples/scf/31-cr_atom_rohf_tune_init_guess.py`.

Restart from an old calculation
-------------------------------

Although alike many other quantum chemistry codes, there is no
`restart` mechanism available in PySCF package, calculations can still
be "restarted" by reading in an earlier wave function as the initial
guess for the wave function.  The initial guess can be prepared in
many ways.  One is to read the ``chkpoint`` file which is generated in
the previous or other calculations::

  >>> from pyscf import scf
  >>> mf = scf.RHF(mol)
  >>> mf.chkfile = '/path/to/chkfile'
  >>> mf.init_guess = 'chkfile'
  >>> mf.kernel()

``/path/to/chkfile`` can be found in the output in the calculation (if
``mol.verbose >= 4``, the filename of the chkfile will be dumped in
the output).  By setting :attr:`chkfile` and :attr:`init_guess`, the
SCF module can read the molecular orbitals from the given
:attr:`chkfile` and rotate them to representation of the required
basis.

The initial guess can also be fed in directly to the calculation. For
example, we can read in the density matrix from a checkpoint file, and
pass it directly to the SCF solver with::

  >>> from pyscf import scf
  >>> mf = scf.RHF(mol)
  >>> dm = scf.hf.from_chk(mol, '/path/to/chkfile')
  >>> mf.kernel(dm)

This approach leads to the same result as setting :attr:`init_guess`
to `chkfile`.

N.B. The ``chkfile`` initial guess is not limited to calculations on
the same molecule or the same basis set. One can first do a cheaper
SCF calculation with smaller basis sets, or run an SCF calculation on
a model system (e.g. drop a few atoms or run the same system in an
easier charge/spin state), then use :func:`scf.hf.from_chk` to project
the results to the target basis sets.


Converging SCF iterations
=========================

Even with a very good initial guess, making the SCF procedure converge
is sometimes challenging. PySCF implements two kinds of approaches for
SCF, namely, direct inversion in the iterative subspace (DIIS) and
second-order SCF (SOSCF).

* DIIS (default)

    With DIIS, the Fock matrix at each iteration is extrapolated using
    Fock matrices from the previous iterations, by minimizing the norm
    of the commutator :math:`[\mathbf{F},\mathbf{PS}]` where
    :math:`\mathbf{P}` is the density matrix
    :cite:`Pulay1980_CPL_393,Pulay1982_JCC_556`.  Two variants of DIIS
    are implemented in PySCF, namely, EDIIS :cite:`Kudin2002_JCP_8255`
    and ADIIS :cite:`Hu2010_JCP_054109`.  Examples of selecting
    different DIIS schemes can be found in
    :source:`examples/scf/24-tune_diis.py`.

* SOSCF

    To achieve quadratic convergence in the orbital optimization,
    PySCF implements a general second-order solver called the
    co-iterative augmented hessian (CIAH) method
    :cite:`Sun2016,Sun2017_CPL_291`. This method can be invoked by
    decorating the SCF objects with the :func:`.newton` method::

        mf = scf.RHF(mol).newton()

    More examples can be found in 
    :source:`examples/scf/22-newton.py`.

* Damping

    The Fock matrix can be damped before DIIS acceleration kicks in.
    This is achieved by setting the attributes :attr:`.damp` and
    :attr:`.diis_start_cycle`.  For example, ::

        mf.damp = 0.5
        mf.diis_start_cycle = 2

    means that DIIS will start at the second cycle, and that the Fock
    matrix is damped by 50% in the first cycle.

* Level shifting

    A level shift increases the gap between the occupied and virtual
    orbitals, thereby slowing down and stabilizing the orbital update.
    A level shift can help to converge SCF in the case of systems with
    small HOMO-LUMO gaps. Level shifting is invoked by setting the
    attribute :attr:`.level_shift`.  See examples in
    :source:`examples/scf/03-level_shift.py`, and
    :source:`examples/scf/52-dynamically_control_level_shift.py`.

* Fractional occupations

    Fractional occupations can also be invoked to help the SCF
    converge for small gap systems.  See the example in
    :source:`examples/scf/54-fractional_occupancy.py`.

* Smearing

    Smearing sets fractional occupancies according to a temperature
    function. See the example :source:`examples/pbc/23-smearing.py`.


.. _stability_analysis:

Stability analysis
==================

Even when the SCF converges, the wave function that is found may not
correspond to a local minimum; calculations can sometimes also
converge onto saddle points. Since saddle points are also extrema of
the energy functional, the orbital gradient vanishes and the SCF
equation :math:`\mathbf{F C}=\mathbf{S C E}` is satisfied
:cite:`Lehtola2020_M_1218`. However, in such cases the energy can be
decreased by perturbing the orbitals away from the saddle point, which
means that the wave function is unstable.

Instabilities in the wave function are conventionally classified as
either internal or external :cite:`Seeger1977_JCP_3045`. External
instabilities mean that the energy can be decreased by loosening some
constraints on the wave function, such as allowing restricted
Hartree-Fock orbitals to transform into unrestricted Hartree-Fock,
whereas internal instabilities mean that the SCF has converged onto an
excited state instead of the ground state. PySCF allows detecting both
internal and external instabilities for a given SCF calculation; see
the examples in :source:`examples/scf/17-stability.py`.

Property calculations
=====================

Various properties can be computed by calling the corresponding
functions, for example,

* dipole moment::
 
    mf.dip_moment()

* Mulliken population:: 

    mf.mulliken_pop()

* nuclear gradients::

    g = mf.Gradients()
    g.kernel()

Also several response properties are available in PySCF, see the
examples in :source:`examples/prop/17-stability.py`.
    

Spin-restricted, spin-unrestricted, restricted open-shell, and generalized calculations
=======================================================================================

The general spin-orbital used in the HF or KS-DFT wave function can be
written as
    .. math::
        \psi_i(1) = \phi_{i\alpha}(r)\alpha + \phi_{i\beta}(r)\beta \;,

Four variants of the ansatz :math:`\psi(1)` are commonly used in
quantum chemistry; they are also all available in PySCF.

* Restricted (RHF/RKS)

  The spin-orbitals are either alpha (spin-up) or beta (spin-down),
  :math:`\psi_i =\phi_i(r)\alpha` or :math:`\psi_i = \phi_i(r)\beta`,
  and the alpha and beta orbitals share the same spatial orbital
  :math:`\phi_i(r)`. The closed-shell determinant is thus
  :math:`\Phi=\mathcal{A}|\phi_1(r_1)\alpha \phi_1(r_2)\beta \ldots
  \phi_{N/2}(r_{N-1})\alpha \phi_{N/2}(r_N)\beta|` and :math:`S=0`.

* Unrestricted (UHF/UKS)
  
  The orbitals can have either alpha or beta spin, but the alpha and
  beta orbitals may have different spatial components. The determinant
  is thus :math:`\Phi=\mathcal{A}|\phi_1(r_1)\sigma_1
  \phi_2(r_2)\sigma_2 \ldots \phi_{N}(r_N)\sigma_N|` where
  :math:`\sigma \in \{\alpha,\beta\}`.  Spin contamination is
  introduced for states that don't have maximal :math:`S_z`.

* Restricted open-shell (ROHF/ROKS)

  Equivalent to RHF/RKS for :math:`N_\alpha = N_\beta`.  For
  :math:`N_\alpha > N_\beta`, the first :math:`N_\beta` orbitals have
  the same spatial components for both :math:`\alpha` and
  :math:`\beta` spin. The remaining :math:`N_\alpha - N_\beta`
  orbitals are of :math:`\alpha` spin.  :math:`\Phi=\mathcal{A}|\phi_1
  \alpha \phi_1\beta \ldots \phi_{N_\beta} \alpha \phi_{N_\beta}\beta
  \phi_{N_\beta+1}\alpha \ldots \phi_{N}\alpha|` The final
  wavefunction is an eigenfunction of the :math:`\hat{S}^2` operator
  with :math:`S_z=S`.

* Generalized (GHF/GKS)

  The general form of the spin-orbital :math:`\psi` is used. GHF/GKS
  is useful when none of the previous methods provide stable solutions
  (see :source:`examples/scf/17-stability.py`), or when the
  Hamiltonian does not commute with :math:`\hat{S}_z` (e.g. in the
  presence of spin-orbit coupling, see
  :source:`examples/scf/44-soc_ecp.py`).
  
Calculations with these methods can be invoked by creating an instance
of the corresponding class::

    mf = scf.RHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.UHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.ROHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.GHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.RKS(mol).run()
    mf = scf.UKS(mol).run()
    mf = scf.ROKS(mol).run()
    mf = scf.GKS(mol).run()

More examples can be found in
:source:`examples/scf/00-simple_hf.py`,
:source:`examples/scf/01-h2o.py`,
:source:`examples/scf/02-rohf_uhf.py`, and
:source:`examples/scf/02-ghf.py`.


References
==========

.. bibliography:: ref_scf.bib
   :style: unsrt

Commit message:

SCF user manual: chkfile addition and fock matrix fix (#10)
* chkfile addition and fock matrix fix

* Undo Fock change, add Susi's chkfile rephrase

Reply to Susi's comments. Thanks!

source/user/scf.rst, after:

.. _theory_scf:

***********************************
Self-consistent field (SCF) methods
***********************************

*Modules*: :mod:`scf`, :mod:`pbc.scf`, :mod:`soscf`

Introduction
============

Self-consistent field (SCF) methods include both Hartree-Fock (HF) theory
and Kohn-Sham (KS) density functional theory (DFT). Self-consistent
field theories only depend on the electronic density matrices, and are
the simplest level of quantum chemical models. Details that are
specific to DFT can be found in :numref:`theory_dft`.

In both HF and KS-DFT, the ground-state wavefunction is expressed as a
single Slater determinant :math:`\Phi_0` of molecular orbitals (MOs)
:math:`\psi`, :math:`\Phi_0 = \mathcal{A}|\psi_1(1)\psi_2(2) \ldots
\psi_N(N)|`:

.. math::

   |\Phi_0\rangle = \frac{1}{\sqrt{N!}}
   \begin{vmatrix} 
   \psi_1(1) &\psi_2(1) &\dots  &\psi_N(1)\\
   \psi_1(2) &\psi_2(2) &\dots  &\psi_N(2)\\
   \vdots               &\vdots               &\ddots &\vdots\\
   \psi_1(N) &\psi_2(N) &\dots  &\psi_N(N)
   \end{vmatrix} \;.

The total electronic energy
:math:`E=\langle\Psi_0|\hat{H}|\Psi_0\rangle` is then minimized,
subject to orbital orthogonality; this is equivalent to the
description of the electrons as independent particles that only
interact via each others' mean field.

It can be shown that the minimization of the total energy within a
given basis set (see e.g. :cite:`Lehtola2020_M_1218` or any standard
textbook on quantum chemistry like :cite:`SzaOst2012`) leads to the
equation

.. math::

    \mathbf{F} \mathbf{C} = \mathbf{S} \mathbf{C} \mathbf{E}

where :math:`\mathbf{C}` is the matrix of molecular orbital
coefficients, :math:`\mathbf{E}` is a diagonal matrix of the
corresponding eigenenergies, and :math:`\mathbf{S}` is the atomic
orbital overlap matrix. The Fock matrix :math:`\mathbf{F}` is defined
as

.. math::

    \mathbf{F} = \mathbf{T} + \mathbf{V} + \mathbf{J} + \mathbf{K}\;

where :math:`\mathbf{T}` is the kinetic energy matrix,
:math:`\mathbf{V}` is the external potential, :math:`\mathbf{J}` is
the Coulomb matrix, and :math:`\mathbf{K}` is the exchange matrix. 

Initial guess
=============

The Coulomb and exchange matrices depend on the occupied orbitals,
meaning that the SCF equation :math:`\mathbf{F C}=\mathbf{S C E}`
needs to be solved self-consistently by some sort of iterative
procedure, which begins from some initial guess. The accuracy of
several initial guesses for SCF calculations has recently been
assessed in :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`, to which we refer for
detailed discussion on initial guesses.

Several of initial guess have been implemented in PySCF; the used
variant is controlled by the :attr:`.init_guess` attribute of the SCF
solver. The following values are possible

* ``'minao'`` (default)

    Superposition of atomic densities projected in a minimal basis
    obtained from the first contracted functions in the cc-pVTZ or
    cc-pVTZ-PP basis set. The guess orbitals are obtained by
    diagonalizing the Fock matrix that arises from the spin-restricted
    guess density.

* ``'1e'``

    The one-electron guess, also known as the core guess, obtains the
    guess orbitals from the diagonalization of the core Hamiltonian
    :math:`\mathbf{H}_0 = \mathbf{T} + \mathbf{V}`, thereby ignoring
    all interelectronic interactions and the screening of nuclear
    charge. The 1e guess should only be used as a last resort, because
    it is so bad for molecular systems; see
    :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`.

* ``'atom'``

    Superposition of atomic HF density matrices. The atomic HF
    calculations are spin-restricted and employ spherically averaged
    fractional occupations with ground states determined with fully
    numerical calculations at the complete basis set limit in
    :cite:`Lehtola2020_PRA_012516`.

* ``'huckel'``

    This is the parameter-free Hückel guess described in
    :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`, which is based on on-the-fly atomic
    HF calculations that are performed analogously to ``'atom'``. The
    spherically averaged atomic spin-restricted Hartree-Fock
    calculations yield a minimal basis of atomic orbitals and orbital
    energies, which are used to build a Hückel type matrix that is
    diagonalized to obtain guess orbitals.

* ``'vsap'``

    Superposition of atomic potentials as described in
    :cite:`Lehtola2019_JCTC_1593`. Pretabulated, fully numerical
    atomic potentials determined with the approach of
    :cite:`Lehtola2020_PRA_012516` are used to build a guess potential
    on a DFT quadrature grid; this potential is then used to obtain
    the orbitals. Note this option is only available for DFT
    calculations in PySCF.
    
* ``'chk'``

    Read in the orbitals from the checkpoint file and use them as the
    initial guess (see below for more details).

Alternatively, the user can also override the initial guess density
matrix for an SCF calculation through the ``dm0`` argument.  For
example, the following script first computes the HF density matrix for
the :math:`\rm Cr^{6+}` cation, and then uses it as an initial guess
for a HF calculation of the :math:`\rm Cr` atom. ::

    # First calculate the Cr6+ cation
    mol = gto.Mole()
    mol.build(
        symmetry = 'D2h',
        atom = [['Cr',(0, 0, 0)], ],
        basis = 'cc-pvdz',
        charge = 6,
        spin = 0,
    )

    mf = scf.RHF(mol)
    mf.kernel()
    dm1 = mf.make_rdm1()

    # Now switch to the neutral atom in the septet state
    mol.charge = 0
    mol.spin = 6
    mol.build(False,False)

    mf = scf.RHF(mol)
    mf.kernel(dm0=dm1)

More examples can be found in
:source:`examples/scf/15-initial_guess.py`, and
:source:`examples/scf/31-cr_atom_rohf_tune_init_guess.py`.

Restart from an old calculation
-------------------------------

Although alike many other quantum chemistry codes, there is no
`restart` mechanism available in PySCF package, calculations can still
be "restarted" by reading in an earlier wave function as the initial
guess for the wave function.  The initial guess can be prepared in
many ways.  One is to read the ``chkpoint`` file which is generated in
the previous or other calculations::

  >>> from pyscf import scf
  >>> mf = scf.RHF(mol)
  >>> mf.chkfile = '/path/to/chkfile'
  >>> mf.init_guess = 'chkfile'
  >>> mf.kernel()

``/path/to/chkfile`` can be found in the output in the calculation (if
``mol.verbose >= 4``, the filename of the chkfile will be dumped in
the output).  If the results of the calculation are needed at a later
stage (e.g. for an eventual restart or use as an initial guess for a
larger calculation), the :attr:`chkfile` attribute should be set
explicitly as the chkfile might otherwise be deleted upon successful
completion of the calculation, see comments in
:source:`examples/scf/14-restart.py`.
By setting :attr:`chkfile` and :attr:`init_guess`, the
SCF module can read the molecular orbitals from the given
:attr:`chkfile` and rotate them to representation of the required
basis.

The initial guess can also be fed in directly to the calculation. For
example, we can read in the density matrix from a checkpoint file, and
pass it directly to the SCF solver with::

  >>> from pyscf import scf
  >>> mf = scf.RHF(mol)
  >>> dm = scf.hf.from_chk(mol, '/path/to/chkfile')
  >>> mf.kernel(dm)

This approach leads to the same result as setting :attr:`init_guess`
to `chkfile`.

N.B. The ``chkfile`` initial guess is not limited to calculations on
the same molecule or the same basis set. One can first do a cheaper
SCF calculation with smaller basis sets, or run an SCF calculation on
a model system (e.g. drop a few atoms or run the same system in an
easier charge/spin state), then use :func:`scf.hf.from_chk` to project
the results to the target basis sets.


Converging SCF iterations
=========================

Even with a very good initial guess, making the SCF procedure converge
is sometimes challenging. PySCF implements two kinds of approaches for
SCF, namely, direct inversion in the iterative subspace (DIIS) and
second-order SCF (SOSCF).

* DIIS (default)

    With DIIS, the Fock matrix at each iteration is extrapolated using
    Fock matrices from the previous iterations, by minimizing the norm
    of the commutator :math:`[\mathbf{F},\mathbf{PS}]` where
    :math:`\mathbf{P}` is the density matrix
    :cite:`Pulay1980_CPL_393,Pulay1982_JCC_556`.  Two variants of DIIS
    are implemented in PySCF, namely, EDIIS :cite:`Kudin2002_JCP_8255`
    and ADIIS :cite:`Hu2010_JCP_054109`.  Examples of selecting
    different DIIS schemes can be found in
    :source:`examples/scf/24-tune_diis.py`.

* SOSCF

    To achieve quadratic convergence in the orbital optimization,
    PySCF implements a general second-order solver called the
    co-iterative augmented hessian (CIAH) method
    :cite:`Sun2016,Sun2017_CPL_291`. This method can be invoked by
    decorating the SCF objects with the :func:`.newton` method::

        mf = scf.RHF(mol).newton()

    More examples can be found in 
    :source:`examples/scf/22-newton.py`.

* Damping

    The Fock matrix can be damped before DIIS acceleration kicks in.
    This is achieved by setting the attributes :attr:`.damp` and
    :attr:`.diis_start_cycle`.  For example, ::

        mf.damp = 0.5
        mf.diis_start_cycle = 2

    means that DIIS will start at the second cycle, and that the Fock
    matrix is damped by 50% in the first cycle.

* Level shifting

    A level shift increases the gap between the occupied and virtual
    orbitals, thereby slowing down and stabilizing the orbital update.
    A level shift can help to converge SCF in the case of systems with
    small HOMO-LUMO gaps. Level shifting is invoked by setting the
    attribute :attr:`.level_shift`.  See examples in
    :source:`examples/scf/03-level_shift.py`, and
    :source:`examples/scf/52-dynamically_control_level_shift.py`.

* Fractional occupations

    Fractional occupations can also be invoked to help the SCF
    converge for small gap systems.  See the example in
    :source:`examples/scf/54-fractional_occupancy.py`.

* Smearing

    Smearing sets fractional occupancies according to a temperature
    function. See the example :source:`examples/pbc/23-smearing.py`.


.. _stability_analysis:

Stability analysis
==================

Even when the SCF converges, the wave function that is found may not
correspond to a local minimum; calculations can sometimes also
converge onto saddle points. Since saddle points are also extrema of
the energy functional, the orbital gradient vanishes and the SCF
equation :math:`\mathbf{F C}=\mathbf{S C E}` is satisfied
:cite:`Lehtola2020_M_1218`. However, in such cases the energy can be
decreased by perturbing the orbitals away from the saddle point, which
means that the wave function is unstable.

Instabilities in the wave function are conventionally classified as
either internal or external :cite:`Seeger1977_JCP_3045`. External
instabilities mean that the energy can be decreased by loosening some
constraints on the wave function, such as allowing restricted
Hartree-Fock orbitals to transform into unrestricted Hartree-Fock,
whereas internal instabilities mean that the SCF has converged onto an
excited state instead of the ground state. PySCF allows detecting both
internal and external instabilities for a given SCF calculation; see
the examples in :source:`examples/scf/17-stability.py`.

Property calculations
=====================

Various properties can be computed by calling the corresponding
functions, for example,

* dipole moment::
 
    mf.dip_moment()

* Mulliken population:: 

    mf.mulliken_pop()

* nuclear gradients::

    g = mf.Gradients()
    g.kernel()

Also several response properties are available in PySCF, see the
examples in :source:`examples/prop/17-stability.py`.
    

Spin-restricted, spin-unrestricted, restricted open-shell, and generalized calculations
=======================================================================================

The general spin-orbital used in the HF or KS-DFT wave function can be
written as
    .. math::
        \psi_i(1) = \phi_{i\alpha}(r)\alpha + \phi_{i\beta}(r)\beta \;,

Four variants of the ansatz :math:`\psi(1)` are commonly used in
quantum chemistry; they are also all available in PySCF.

* Restricted (RHF/RKS)

  The spin-orbitals are either alpha (spin-up) or beta (spin-down),
  :math:`\psi_i =\phi_i(r)\alpha` or :math:`\psi_i = \phi_i(r)\beta`,
  and the alpha and beta orbitals share the same spatial orbital
  :math:`\phi_i(r)`. The closed-shell determinant is thus
  :math:`\Phi=\mathcal{A}|\phi_1(r_1)\alpha \phi_1(r_2)\beta \ldots
  \phi_{N/2}(r_{N-1})\alpha \phi_{N/2}(r_N)\beta|` and :math:`S=0`.

* Unrestricted (UHF/UKS)
  
  The orbitals can have either alpha or beta spin, but the alpha and
  beta orbitals may have different spatial components. The determinant
  is thus :math:`\Phi=\mathcal{A}|\phi_1(r_1)\sigma_1
  \phi_2(r_2)\sigma_2 \ldots \phi_{N}(r_N)\sigma_N|` where
  :math:`\sigma \in \{\alpha,\beta\}`.  Spin contamination is
  introduced for states that don't have maximal :math:`S_z`.

* Restricted open-shell (ROHF/ROKS)

  Equivalent to RHF/RKS for :math:`N_\alpha = N_\beta`.  For
  :math:`N_\alpha > N_\beta`, the first :math:`N_\beta` orbitals have
  the same spatial components for both :math:`\alpha` and
  :math:`\beta` spin. The remaining :math:`N_\alpha - N_\beta`
  orbitals are of :math:`\alpha` spin.  :math:`\Phi=\mathcal{A}|\phi_1
  \alpha \phi_1\beta \ldots \phi_{N_\beta} \alpha \phi_{N_\beta}\beta
  \phi_{N_\beta+1}\alpha \ldots \phi_{N}\alpha|` The final
  wavefunction is an eigenfunction of the :math:`\hat{S}^2` operator
  with :math:`S_z=S`.

* Generalized (GHF/GKS)

  The general form of the spin-orbital :math:`\psi` is used. GHF/GKS
  is useful when none of the previous methods provide stable solutions
  (see :source:`examples/scf/17-stability.py`), or when the
  Hamiltonian does not commute with :math:`\hat{S}_z` (e.g. in the
  presence of spin-orbit coupling, see
  :source:`examples/scf/44-soc_ecp.py`).
  
Calculations with these methods can be invoked by creating an instance
of the corresponding class::

    mf = scf.RHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.UHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.ROHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.GHF(mol).run()
    mf = scf.RKS(mol).run()
    mf = scf.UKS(mol).run()
    mf = scf.ROKS(mol).run()
    mf = scf.GKS(mol).run()

More examples can be found in
:source:`examples/scf/00-simple_hf.py`,
:source:`examples/scf/01-h2o.py`,
:source:`examples/scf/02-rohf_uhf.py`, and
:source:`examples/scf/02-ghf.py`.


References
==========

.. bibliography:: ref_scf.bib
   :style: unsrt
