source/install.rst, before:

.. _installing:

Installation
************

Installation with pip
=====================

This is the recommended way to install PySCF::

  $ pip install pyscf

Pypi provides a precompiled PySCF code (python wheel) which works on almost all
Linux systems, and most of Mac OS X systems, and the ubuntu subsystems on Windows 10.
If you already have pyscf installed, you can upgrade it to the new version::

  $ pip install --upgrade pyscf

Note we observed that our precompiled python wheels sometimes does not work with
certain version of Python (python-3.4 and python-3.5).  If you're using mac OS X
with python-3.4 or python-3.5, pip may execute the setup.py file in the source
code and it may be terminated due to an error of library path of BLAS library.
BLAS library is required to install PySCF library.  The installation script can
detect the installed BLAS libraries in the system and choose one for the
program.  If BLAS library is existed but wasn't found by the installation
script, you can specify the BLAS library either through the environment
``LDFLAGS``, e.g. ``LDFLAGS="-L/path/to/blas -lblas" pip install pyscf`` or the
environment variable ``PYSCF_INC_DIR``, e.g.
``PYSCF_INC_DIR=/path/to/blas:/path/to/other/lib pip install`` to tell the
installation script which BLAS libraries to link against.
Another issue of the installation script you may get is that pyscf.dft module is
not working.  pyscf.dft module requires the exchange-correlation functional
library ``libxc`` which was not yet available in the PyPI repository. To enable
pyscf.dft module, you can download and manually compile libxc library and set
the environment variable ``PYSCF_INC_DIR``, e.g. ``export PYSCF_INC_DIR=/path/to/libxc``
before calling ``pip install`` command.  Libxc library can be found in
http://octopus-code.org/wiki/Libxc:download.  When compiling the libxc library,
you need to add --enable-shared flag.

Since PySCF-2.0, some modules were developed indepently as :ref:`installing_extlibs`.
Individual external module (for example the geometry optimization library) can
be installed using pip extra dependency::

  $ pip install pyscf[geomopt]

Command to install all external modules::

  $ pip install pyscf[all]

External modules can be found in `https://github.com/pyscf` (see also :ref:`installing_extlibs`).
To install the latest version of the external modules from github, github repo
url with prefix `git+` can be placed in the argument list of pip command::

  $ pip install git+https://github.com/pyscf/geomopt


Installation with conda
=======================

If you have `Conda <https://conda.io/docs/>`_ 
(or `Anaconda <https://www.continuum.io/downloads#linux>`_)
environment, PySCF package can be installed with Conda cloud::

  $ conda install -c pyscf pyscf

External libraries are not available on conda cloud. They should be installed
with pip command or through environment variable `PYSCF_EXT_PATH` (see the
section :ref:`installing_extlibs`).


PySCF docker image
==================

The following command starts a container with the jupyter notebook server
listening for HTTP connections on port 8888::

  $ docker run -it -p 8888:8888 pyscf/pyscf:latest

Then visit ``https://localhost:8888`` with your browser to use notebook and
pyscf.

Another way to use PySCF in docker container is to start an Ipython shell::

  $ docker run -it pyscf/pyscf:latest start.sh ipython


.. _compile_c_extensions:
Manual installation from github repo
====================================

Manual installation requires `cmake <http://www.cmake.org>`_,
`numpy <http://www.numpy.org/>`_, `scipy <http://www.scipy.org/>`_
and `h5py <http://www.h5py.org/>`_ libraries.
You can download the latest PySCF (or the development branch) from github::

  $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf.git
  $ cd pyscf
  $ git checkout dev  # optional if you'd like to try out the development branch

Build the C extensions in :file:`pyscf/lib`::

  $ cd pyscf/lib
  $ mkdir build
  $ cd build
  $ cmake ..
  $ make

This will automatically download the analytical GTO integral library `libcint
<https://github.com/sunqm/libcint.git>`_ and the DFT exchange correlation
functional libraries `Libxc <http://www.tddft.org/programs/Libxc>`_ and `XCFun
<https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun.git>`_.  Finally, to make Python find
the :code:`pyscf` package, add the top-level :code:`pyscf` directory (not
the :code:`pyscf/pyscf` subdirectory) to :code:`PYTHONPATH`.  For example, if
:code:`pyscf` is installed in ``/opt``, :code:`PYTHONPATH` should be like::

  export PYTHONPATH=/opt/pyscf:$PYTHONPATH

To ensure the installation is successful, start a Python shell, and type::

  >>> import pyscf

For Mac OS X/macOS, you may get an import error if your OS X/macOS version is
10.11 or newer::

    OSError: dlopen(xxx/pyscf/pyscf/lib/libcgto.dylib, 6): Library not loaded: libcint.3.0.dylib
    Referenced from: xxx/pyscf/pyscf/lib/libcgto.dylib
    Reason: unsafe use of relative rpath libcint.3.0.dylib in xxx/pyscf/pyscf/lib/libcgto.dylib with restricted binary

This is caused by the incorrect RPATH.  Script
``pyscf/lib/_runme_to_fix_dylib_osx10.11.sh`` in ``pyscf/lib`` directory can be
used to fix this problem::
 
    cd pyscf/lib
    sh _runme_to_fix_dylib_osx10.11.sh


.. note::

  RPATH has been built in the dynamic library.  This may cause library loading
  error on some systems.  You can run ``pyscf/lib/_runme_to_remove_rpath.sh`` to
  remove the rpath code from the library head.  Another workaround is to set
  ``-DCMAKE_SKIP_RPATH=1`` and ``-DCMAKE_MACOSX_RPATH=0`` in cmake command line.
  When the RPATH was removed, you need to add ``pyscf/lib`` and
  ``pyscf/lib/deps/lib`` in ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``.

Last, it's recommended to set a scratch directory for PySCF.  The default scratch
directory is controlled by environment variable :code:`PYSCF_TMPDIR`.  If it's
not specified, the system temporary directory :code:`TMPDIR` will be used as the
scratch directory.


Installation without network
============================

If you have problems to download the external libraries on your computer, you can
manually build the libraries, as shown in the following instructions.  First,
you need to install libcint, Libxc and XCFun libraries::

    $ git clone https://github.com/sunqm/libcint.git
    $ tar czf libcint.tar.gz libcint

    $ wget https://gitlab.com/libxc/libxc/-/archive/4.3.4/libxc-4.3.4.tar.gz

    $ git clone https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun.git
    $ tar czf xcfun.tar.gz xcfun

Assuming ``/opt`` is the place where these libraries will be installed, these
packages should be compiled with the flags::

    $ tar xvzf libcint.tar.gz
    $ cd libcint
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ cmake -DWITH_F12=1 -DWITH_RANGE_COULOMB=1 -DWITH_COULOMB_ERF=1 \
        -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/opt -DCMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR:PATH=lib ..
    $ make && make install

    $ tar xvzf libxc-4.3.4.tar.gz
    $ cd libxc-4.3.4
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ ../configure --prefix=/opt --libdir=/opt/lib --enable-vxc --enable-fxc --enable-kxc \
        --enable-shared --disable-static --enable-shared --disable-fortran LIBS=-lm
    $ make && make install

    $ tar xvzf xcfun.tar.gz
    $ cd xcfun
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RELEASE -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=1 -DXC_MAX_ORDER=3 -DXCFUN_ENABLE_TESTS=0 \
        -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/opt -DCMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR:PATH=lib ..
    $ make && make install

Next, compile PySCF::

    $ cd pyscf/pyscf/lib
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ cmake -DBUILD_LIBCINT=0 -DBUILD_LIBXC=0 -DBUILD_XCFUN=0 -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/opt ..
    $ make

Finally update the ``PYTHONPATH`` environment for Python interpreter.


.. _installing_blas:

Using optimized BLAS
====================

The default installation tries to find BLAS libraries automatically. This
automated setup script may link the code to slow BLAS libraries.  You can
compile the package with other BLAS vendors to improve performance, for example
the Intel Math Kernel Library (MKL), which can provide 10x speedup in many
modules::

  $ cd pyscf/lib/build
  $ cmake -DBLA_VENDOR=Intel10_64lp_seq ..
  $ make

When linking the program to MKL library, for some MKL versions, cmake may have
problems to find the correct MKL libraries.  Setting ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` to
include the MKL dynamic libraries sometimes can help cmake to find the MKL
libraries, e.g.::

  export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/opt/intel/compilers_and_libraries_2018/linux/mkl/lib/intel64:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

If you are using Anaconda as your Python-side platform, you can link PySCF
to the MKL library coming with Anaconda package::

  $ export MKLROOT=/path/to/anaconda2
  $ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$MKLROOT/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
  $ cd pyscf/lib/build
  $ cmake -DBLA_VENDOR=Intel10_64lp_seq ..
  $ make

You can link to other BLAS libraries by setting ``BLA_VENDOR``, eg
``BLA_VENDOR=ATLAS``, ``BLA_VENDOR=IBMESSL``, ``BLA_VENDOR=OpenBLAS`` (requiring cmake-3.6).
Please refer to `cmake mannual <http://www.cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.6/module/FindBLAS.html>`_
for more details of the use of ``FindBLAS`` macro.

If the cmake ``BLA_VENDOR`` cannot find the right BLAS library as you expected,
you can assign the libraries to the variable ``BLAS_LIBRARIES`` in
:file:`lib/CMakeLists.txt`::

  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_intel_lp64.so")
  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_sequential.so")
  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_core.so")
  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_avx.so")

.. note::
  MKL library may lead to an OSError at runtime:
  ``OSError: ... mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_avx.so: undefined symbol: ownLastTriangle_64fc``
  or ``MKL FATAL ERROR: Cannot load libmkl_avx.so or libmkl_def.so.``.
  It can be solved by preloading MKL core library with:
  ``export LD_PRELOAD=$MKLROOT/lib/intel64/libmkl_avx.so:$MKLROOT/lib/intel64/libmkl_core.so``


.. _installing_qcint:

Using optimized integral library
================================

The default integral library used by PySCF is
libcint (https://github.com/sunqm/libcint).  This integral library was
implemented in the model that ensures the compatibility on various high
performance computer systems.  For X86-64 platforms, libcint library has an
efficient counterpart Qcint (https://github.com/sunqm/qcint)
which is heavily optimized against X86 SIMD instructions (AVX-512/AVX2/AVX/SSE3).
To replace the default libcint library with qcint library, edit the URL
of the integral library in lib/CMakeLists.txt file::

  ExternalProject_Add(libcint
     GIT_REPOSITORY
     https://github.com/sunqm/qcint.git
     ...


Cmake config file
=================
Cmake options can be saved in a config file ``pyscf/lib/cmake.arch.inc``.
Settings in this config file will be automatically loaded and overwritten the
default cmake options during compilation.  For example, you can put
``CMAKE_C_FLAGS`` in this config file to include advanced compiler optimization
flags::

  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS "${CMAKE_C_FLAGS} -ffast-math -mtune=native -march=native")

Other settings and variables and flags can all be put in this config file::

  set(ENABLE_XCFUN Off)
  set(WITH_F12 Off)

Some examples of platform specific configurations can be found in directory
``pyscf/lib/cmake_arch_config``.


.. _installing_plugin:

Plugins
=======

NAO
---
The :mod:`nao` module includes the basic functions of numerical atomic orbitals
(NAO) and the (nao based) TDDFT methods.  This module was contributed by Marc
Barbry and Peter Koval.  You can enable this module with a cmake flag::

    $ cmake -DENABLE_NAO=1 ..

More information of the compilation can be found in :file:`pyscf/lib/nao/README.md`.


DMRG solver
-----------
Density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) implementations Block
(https://sanshar.github.io/Block) and
CheMPS2 (http://sebwouters.github.io/CheMPS2/index.html)
are efficient DMRG solvers for ab initio quantum chemistry problem.
`Installing Block <https://sanshar.github.io/Block/build.html>`_ requires
C++11 compiler.  If C++11 is not supported by your compiler, you can
register and download the precompiled Block binary from
https://sanshar.github.io/Block/build.html.
Before using the Block or CheMPS2, you need create a configuration file
``pyscf/dmrgscf/settings.py``  (as shown by settings.py.example) to store
the path where the DMRG solver was installed.


Libxc
-----
By default, building PySCF will automatically download and install
`Libxc 4.3.4 <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/download/>`_.
:mod:`pyscf.dft.libxc` module provided a general interface to access Libxc functionals.


XCFun
-----
By default, building PySCF will automatically download and install
latest XCFun code from https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun.
:mod:`pyscf.dft.xcfun` module provided a general interface to access XCFun functionals.


TBLIS
-----
`TBLIS <https://github.com/devinamatthews/tblis>`_ provides a native algorithm
to perform tensor contraction for arbitrary high dimensional tensors. The native
algorithm does not need to transform tensors into matrices then call the BLAS
libraries for the matrix contraction.  Tensor transposing and data moving are
largely avoided in TBLIS tensor library.  The interface to TBLIS offers an
efficient implementation for :func:`numpy.einsum` style tensor contraction.
To enable the tlibs-einsum plugin, you can set the cmake flags
``-DENABLE_TBLIS`` when compiling the C extensions::

  $ cmake -DENABLE_TBLIS=ON ..

Note TBLIS library was implemented with C++11 standard. You need at least GCC
5.2 to compile this plugin.


Pyberny
-------
The geometry optimizer `Pyberny <https://github.com/jhrmnn/pyberny>`_ provides an
independent implementation that supports various geometry optimization
techniques (comprising redundant internal coordinates, iterative Hessian
estimate, trust region, line search, and coordinate weighing etc.).  It can take
the output of PySCF Gradients :ref:`scanner` and generate new geometry to feed
back to PySCF program.  The geometry optimization :mod:`geomopt` exposes a
wrapper function to simplify the geometry optimization setup::

  from pyscf import gto, scf, geomopt
  mf = gto.M(atom='H 0 0 0; H 0 0 1.').apply(scf.RHF)
  mol_eq = geomopt.optimize(mf)


.. _installing_extlibs:

External libraries
==================
Since PySCF-2.0, some modules were moved from the main code trunk to external
projects hosted in https://github.com/pyscf.

------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
Project             URL                                                
------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
semiemprical        https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical
cornell_shci        https://github.com/pyscf/cornell_shci
dftd3               https://github.com/pyscf/dftd3
dmrgscf             https://github.com/pyscf/dmrgscf
doci                https://github.com/pyscf/doci
eph                 https://github.com/pyscf/eph
extras              https://github.com/pyscf/extras
fciqmcscf           https://github.com/pyscf/fciqmcscf
icmpspt             https://github.com/pyscf/icmpspt
mrpt                https://github.com/pyscf/mrpt
naive_hci           https://github.com/pyscf/naive_hci
nao                 https://github.com/pyscf/nao
rt                  https://github.com/pyscf/rt
semiempirical       https://github.com/pyscf/semiempirical
shciscf             https://github.com/pyscf/shciscf
zquatev             https://github.com/sunqm/zquatev
tblis
------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------

There are a couple of methods to install the external libraries.

* Pypi command. For pypi newer than 19.0, projects that are hosted
  on github can be installed in command line::

    $ pip install git+https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical

  A particular release on github can be installed with the release URL you found
  on github::

    $ pip install https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical/archive/v0.1.0.tar.gz

* Pypi command for a local copy. If you wish to develop an external library
  locally, you can use the local install mode of pip. In this way, it's
  recommended to operate in virtual environment so that changes you made do
  not pollute the system default python runtime environment. For example::

    $ python -m venv /home/abc/pyscf-local-env
    $ source /home/abc/pyscf-local-env/bin/activate
    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical /home/abc/semiemprical
    $ pip install -e /home/abc/semiemprical

* Environment variable `PYSCF_EXT_PATH`. You can put the location of each
  external library or a file that contains these locations in this environment
  varialbe. PySCF library will parse the paths defined in this environment
  variable and load the relevent submodules. For example::

    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical /home/abc/semiemprical
    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/mrpt /home/abc/mrpt
    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/dftd3 /home/abc/dftd3
    $ echo /home/abc/mrpt >> /home/abc/.pyscf_ext_modules
    $ echo /home/abc/dftd3 >> /home/abc/.pyscf_ext_modules
    $ export PYSCF_EXT_PATH=/home/abc/semiemprical:/home/abc/.pyscf_ext_modules

  Using the so-defined environment variable `PYSCF_EXT_PATH`, three external
  submodules (semiemprical, mrpt, dftd3) will be loaded when pyscf was imported.
  In this way, you don't have to use the python virtual environment.

Once the external libraries are correctly installed (with any methods shown
above), you can use them as the regular submodules developed inside the pyscf
main branch::

    >>> import pyscf
    >>> from pyscf.semiemprical import MINDO
    >>> mol = pyscf.M(atom='N 0 0 0; N 0 0 1')
    >>> MINDO(mol).run()

Commit message:

Change External library to extended module in install manual

source/install.rst, after:

.. _installing:

Installation
************

Installation with pip
=====================

This is the recommended way to install PySCF::

  $ pip install pyscf

Pypi provides a precompiled PySCF code (python wheel) which works on almost all
Linux systems, and most of Mac OS X systems, and the ubuntu subsystems on Windows 10.
If you already have pyscf installed, you can upgrade it to the new version::

  $ pip install --upgrade pyscf

Note we observed that our precompiled python wheels sometimes does not work with
certain version of Python (python-3.4 and python-3.5).  If you're using mac OS X
with python-3.4 or python-3.5, pip may execute the setup.py file in the source
code and it may be terminated due to an error of library path of BLAS library.
BLAS library is required to install PySCF library.  The installation script can
detect the installed BLAS libraries in the system and choose one for the
program.  If BLAS library is existed but wasn't found by the installation
script, you can specify the BLAS library either through the environment
``LDFLAGS``, e.g. ``LDFLAGS="-L/path/to/blas -lblas" pip install pyscf`` or the
environment variable ``PYSCF_INC_DIR``, e.g.
``PYSCF_INC_DIR=/path/to/blas:/path/to/other/lib pip install`` to tell the
installation script which BLAS libraries to link against.
Another issue of the installation script you may get is that pyscf.dft module is
not working.  pyscf.dft module requires the exchange-correlation functional
library ``libxc`` which was not yet available in the PyPI repository. To enable
pyscf.dft module, you can download and manually compile libxc library and set
the environment variable ``PYSCF_INC_DIR``, e.g. ``export PYSCF_INC_DIR=/path/to/libxc``
before calling ``pip install`` command.  Libxc library can be found in
http://octopus-code.org/wiki/Libxc:download.  When compiling the libxc library,
you need to add --enable-shared flag.

Since PySCF-2.0, some modules were developed indepently as :ref:`installing_extproj`.
Individual extended module (for example the geometry optimization module) can
be installed using pip extra dependency::

  $ pip install pyscf[geomopt]

Command to install all extended modules::

  $ pip install pyscf[all]

Extended modules can be found in `https://github.com/pyscf` (see also :ref:`installing_extproj`).
To install the latest version of the extended modules from github, github repo
url with prefix `git+` can be placed in the argument list of pip command::

  $ pip install git+https://github.com/pyscf/geomopt


Installation with conda
=======================

If you have `Conda <https://conda.io/docs/>`_ 
(or `Anaconda <https://www.continuum.io/downloads#linux>`_)
environment, PySCF package can be installed with Conda cloud::

  $ conda install -c pyscf pyscf

Extended modules are not available on conda cloud. They should be installed
with pip command or through environment variable `PYSCF_EXT_PATH` (see the
section :ref:`installing_extproj`).


PySCF docker image
==================

The following command starts a container with the jupyter notebook server
listening for HTTP connections on port 8888::

  $ docker run -it -p 8888:8888 pyscf/pyscf:latest

Then visit ``https://localhost:8888`` with your browser to use notebook and
pyscf.

Another way to use PySCF in docker container is to start an Ipython shell::

  $ docker run -it pyscf/pyscf:latest start.sh ipython


.. _compile_c_extensions:
Manual installation from github repo
====================================

Manual installation requires `cmake <http://www.cmake.org>`_,
`numpy <http://www.numpy.org/>`_, `scipy <http://www.scipy.org/>`_
and `h5py <http://www.h5py.org/>`_ libraries.
You can download the latest PySCF (or the development branch) from github::

  $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/pyscf.git
  $ cd pyscf
  $ git checkout dev  # optional if you'd like to try out the development branch

Build the C extensions in :file:`pyscf/lib`::

  $ cd pyscf/lib
  $ mkdir build
  $ cd build
  $ cmake ..
  $ make

This will automatically download the analytical GTO integral library `libcint
<https://github.com/sunqm/libcint.git>`_ and the DFT exchange correlation
functional libraries `Libxc <http://www.tddft.org/programs/Libxc>`_ and `XCFun
<https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun.git>`_.  Finally, to make Python find
the :code:`pyscf` package, add the top-level :code:`pyscf` directory (not
the :code:`pyscf/pyscf` subdirectory) to :code:`PYTHONPATH`.  For example, if
:code:`pyscf` is installed in ``/opt``, :code:`PYTHONPATH` should be like::

  export PYTHONPATH=/opt/pyscf:$PYTHONPATH

To ensure the installation is successful, start a Python shell, and type::

  >>> import pyscf

For Mac OS X/macOS, you may get an import error if your OS X/macOS version is
10.11 or newer::

    OSError: dlopen(xxx/pyscf/pyscf/lib/libcgto.dylib, 6): Library not loaded: libcint.3.0.dylib
    Referenced from: xxx/pyscf/pyscf/lib/libcgto.dylib
    Reason: unsafe use of relative rpath libcint.3.0.dylib in xxx/pyscf/pyscf/lib/libcgto.dylib with restricted binary

This is caused by the incorrect RPATH.  Script
``pyscf/lib/_runme_to_fix_dylib_osx10.11.sh`` in ``pyscf/lib`` directory can be
used to fix this problem::
 
    cd pyscf/lib
    sh _runme_to_fix_dylib_osx10.11.sh


.. note::

  RPATH has been built in the dynamic library.  This may cause library loading
  error on some systems.  You can run ``pyscf/lib/_runme_to_remove_rpath.sh`` to
  remove the rpath code from the library head.  Another workaround is to set
  ``-DCMAKE_SKIP_RPATH=1`` and ``-DCMAKE_MACOSX_RPATH=0`` in cmake command line.
  When the RPATH was removed, you need to add ``pyscf/lib`` and
  ``pyscf/lib/deps/lib`` in ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH``.

Last, it's recommended to set a scratch directory for PySCF.  The default scratch
directory is controlled by environment variable :code:`PYSCF_TMPDIR`.  If it's
not specified, the system temporary directory :code:`TMPDIR` will be used as the
scratch directory.


Installation without network
============================

If you have problems to download the external libraries on your computer, you can
manually build the libraries, as shown in the following instructions.  First,
you need to install libcint, Libxc and XCFun libraries::

    $ git clone https://github.com/sunqm/libcint.git
    $ tar czf libcint.tar.gz libcint

    $ wget https://gitlab.com/libxc/libxc/-/archive/4.3.4/libxc-4.3.4.tar.gz

    $ git clone https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun.git
    $ tar czf xcfun.tar.gz xcfun

Assuming ``/opt`` is the place where these libraries will be installed, these
packages should be compiled with the flags::

    $ tar xvzf libcint.tar.gz
    $ cd libcint
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ cmake -DWITH_F12=1 -DWITH_RANGE_COULOMB=1 -DWITH_COULOMB_ERF=1 \
        -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/opt -DCMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR:PATH=lib ..
    $ make && make install

    $ tar xvzf libxc-4.3.4.tar.gz
    $ cd libxc-4.3.4
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ ../configure --prefix=/opt --libdir=/opt/lib --enable-vxc --enable-fxc --enable-kxc \
        --enable-shared --disable-static --enable-shared --disable-fortran LIBS=-lm
    $ make && make install

    $ tar xvzf xcfun.tar.gz
    $ cd xcfun
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ cmake -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=RELEASE -DBUILD_SHARED_LIBS=1 -DXC_MAX_ORDER=3 -DXCFUN_ENABLE_TESTS=0 \
        -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/opt -DCMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR:PATH=lib ..
    $ make && make install

Next, compile PySCF::

    $ cd pyscf/pyscf/lib
    $ mkdir build && cd build
    $ cmake -DBUILD_LIBCINT=0 -DBUILD_LIBXC=0 -DBUILD_XCFUN=0 -DCMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX:PATH=/opt ..
    $ make

Finally update the ``PYTHONPATH`` environment for Python interpreter.


.. _installing_blas:

Using optimized BLAS
====================

The default installation tries to find BLAS libraries automatically. This
automated setup script may link the code to slow BLAS libraries.  You can
compile the package with other BLAS vendors to improve performance, for example
the Intel Math Kernel Library (MKL), which can provide 10x speedup in many
modules::

  $ cd pyscf/lib/build
  $ cmake -DBLA_VENDOR=Intel10_64lp_seq ..
  $ make

When linking the program to MKL library, for some MKL versions, cmake may have
problems to find the correct MKL libraries.  Setting ``LD_LIBRARY_PATH`` to
include the MKL dynamic libraries sometimes can help cmake to find the MKL
libraries, e.g.::

  export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=/opt/intel/compilers_and_libraries_2018/linux/mkl/lib/intel64:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH

If you are using Anaconda as your Python-side platform, you can link PySCF
to the MKL library coming with Anaconda package::

  $ export MKLROOT=/path/to/anaconda2
  $ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$MKLROOT/lib:$LD_LIBRARY_PATH
  $ cd pyscf/lib/build
  $ cmake -DBLA_VENDOR=Intel10_64lp_seq ..
  $ make

You can link to other BLAS libraries by setting ``BLA_VENDOR``, eg
``BLA_VENDOR=ATLAS``, ``BLA_VENDOR=IBMESSL``, ``BLA_VENDOR=OpenBLAS`` (requiring cmake-3.6).
Please refer to `cmake mannual <http://www.cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.6/module/FindBLAS.html>`_
for more details of the use of ``FindBLAS`` macro.

If the cmake ``BLA_VENDOR`` cannot find the right BLAS library as you expected,
you can assign the libraries to the variable ``BLAS_LIBRARIES`` in
:file:`lib/CMakeLists.txt`::

  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_intel_lp64.so")
  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_sequential.so")
  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_core.so")
  set(BLAS_LIBRARIES "${BLAS_LIBRARIES};/path/to/mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_avx.so")

.. note::
  MKL library may lead to an OSError at runtime:
  ``OSError: ... mkl/lib/intel64/libmkl_avx.so: undefined symbol: ownLastTriangle_64fc``
  or ``MKL FATAL ERROR: Cannot load libmkl_avx.so or libmkl_def.so.``.
  It can be solved by preloading MKL core library with:
  ``export LD_PRELOAD=$MKLROOT/lib/intel64/libmkl_avx.so:$MKLROOT/lib/intel64/libmkl_core.so``


.. _installing_qcint:

Using optimized integral library
================================

The default integral library used by PySCF is
libcint (https://github.com/sunqm/libcint).  This integral library was
implemented in the model that ensures the compatibility on various high
performance computer systems.  For X86-64 platforms, libcint library has an
efficient counterpart Qcint (https://github.com/sunqm/qcint)
which is heavily optimized against X86 SIMD instructions (AVX-512/AVX2/AVX/SSE3).
To replace the default libcint library with qcint library, edit the URL
of the integral library in lib/CMakeLists.txt file::

  ExternalProject_Add(libcint
     GIT_REPOSITORY
     https://github.com/sunqm/qcint.git
     ...


Cmake config file
=================
Cmake options can be saved in a config file ``pyscf/lib/cmake.arch.inc``.
Settings in this config file will be automatically loaded and overwritten the
default cmake options during compilation.  For example, you can put
``CMAKE_C_FLAGS`` in this config file to include advanced compiler optimization
flags::

  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS "${CMAKE_C_FLAGS} -ffast-math -mtune=native -march=native")

Other settings and variables and flags can all be put in this config file::

  set(ENABLE_XCFUN Off)
  set(WITH_F12 Off)

Some examples of platform specific configurations can be found in directory
``pyscf/lib/cmake_arch_config``.


.. _installing_plugin:

Plugins
=======

NAO
---
The :mod:`nao` module includes the basic functions of numerical atomic orbitals
(NAO) and the (nao based) TDDFT methods.  This module was contributed by Marc
Barbry and Peter Koval.  You can enable this module with a cmake flag::

    $ cmake -DENABLE_NAO=1 ..

More information of the compilation can be found in :file:`pyscf/lib/nao/README.md`.


DMRG solver
-----------
Density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) implementations Block
(https://sanshar.github.io/Block) and
CheMPS2 (http://sebwouters.github.io/CheMPS2/index.html)
are efficient DMRG solvers for ab initio quantum chemistry problem.
`Installing Block <https://sanshar.github.io/Block/build.html>`_ requires
C++11 compiler.  If C++11 is not supported by your compiler, you can
register and download the precompiled Block binary from
https://sanshar.github.io/Block/build.html.
Before using the Block or CheMPS2, you need create a configuration file
``pyscf/dmrgscf/settings.py``  (as shown by settings.py.example) to store
the path where the DMRG solver was installed.


Libxc
-----
By default, building PySCF will automatically download and install
`Libxc 4.3.4 <https://www.tddft.org/programs/libxc/download/>`_.
:mod:`pyscf.dft.libxc` module provided a general interface to access Libxc functionals.


XCFun
-----
By default, building PySCF will automatically download and install
latest XCFun code from https://github.com/dftlibs/xcfun.
:mod:`pyscf.dft.xcfun` module provided a general interface to access XCFun functionals.


TBLIS
-----
`TBLIS <https://github.com/devinamatthews/tblis>`_ provides a native algorithm
to perform tensor contraction for arbitrary high dimensional tensors. The native
algorithm does not need to transform tensors into matrices then call the BLAS
libraries for the matrix contraction.  Tensor transposing and data moving are
largely avoided in TBLIS tensor library.  The interface to TBLIS offers an
efficient implementation for :func:`numpy.einsum` style tensor contraction.
To enable the tlibs-einsum plugin, you can set the cmake flags
``-DENABLE_TBLIS`` when compiling the C extensions::

  $ cmake -DENABLE_TBLIS=ON ..

Note TBLIS library was implemented with C++11 standard. You need at least GCC
5.2 to compile this plugin.


Pyberny
-------
The geometry optimizer `Pyberny <https://github.com/jhrmnn/pyberny>`_ provides an
independent implementation that supports various geometry optimization
techniques (comprising redundant internal coordinates, iterative Hessian
estimate, trust region, line search, and coordinate weighing etc.).  It can take
the output of PySCF Gradients :ref:`scanner` and generate new geometry to feed
back to PySCF program.  The geometry optimization :mod:`geomopt` exposes a
wrapper function to simplify the geometry optimization setup::

  from pyscf import gto, scf, geomopt
  mf = gto.M(atom='H 0 0 0; H 0 0 1.').apply(scf.RHF)
  mol_eq = geomopt.optimize(mf)


.. _installing_extproj:

Extended modules
================
Since PySCF-2.0, some modules were moved from the main code trunk to extended
projects hosted in https://github.com/pyscf.

------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
Project             URL                                                
------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------
semiemprical        https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical
cornell_shci        https://github.com/pyscf/cornell_shci
dftd3               https://github.com/pyscf/dftd3
dmrgscf             https://github.com/pyscf/dmrgscf
doci                https://github.com/pyscf/doci
eph                 https://github.com/pyscf/eph
extras              https://github.com/pyscf/extras
fciqmcscf           https://github.com/pyscf/fciqmcscf
icmpspt             https://github.com/pyscf/icmpspt
mrpt                https://github.com/pyscf/mrpt
naive_hci           https://github.com/pyscf/naive_hci
nao                 https://github.com/pyscf/nao
rt                  https://github.com/pyscf/rt
semiempirical       https://github.com/pyscf/semiempirical
shciscf             https://github.com/pyscf/shciscf
zquatev             https://github.com/sunqm/zquatev
tblis
------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------

There are a couple of methods to install the extended modules.

* Pypi command. For pypi newer than 19.0, projects that are hosted
  on github can be installed in command line::

    $ pip install git+https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical

  A particular release on github can be installed with the release URL you found
  on github::

    $ pip install https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical/archive/v0.1.0.tar.gz

* Pypi command for a local copy. If you wish to develop an extended module
  locally, you can use the local install mode of pip. In this way, it's
  recommended to operate in virtual environment so that changes you made do
  not pollute the system default python runtime environment. For example::

    $ python -m venv /home/abc/pyscf-local-env
    $ source /home/abc/pyscf-local-env/bin/activate
    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical /home/abc/semiemprical
    $ pip install -e /home/abc/semiemprical

* Environment variable `PYSCF_EXT_PATH`. You can put the location of each
  extended module or a file that contains these locations in this environment
  varialbe. PySCF library will parse the paths defined in this environment
  variable and load the relevent submodules. For example::

    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/semiemprical /home/abc/semiemprical
    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/mrpt /home/abc/mrpt
    $ git clone https://github.com/pyscf/dftd3 /home/abc/dftd3
    $ echo /home/abc/mrpt >> /home/abc/.pyscf_ext_modules
    $ echo /home/abc/dftd3 >> /home/abc/.pyscf_ext_modules
    $ export PYSCF_EXT_PATH=/home/abc/semiemprical:/home/abc/.pyscf_ext_modules

  Using the so-defined environment variable `PYSCF_EXT_PATH`, three extended
  submodules (semiemprical, mrpt, dftd3) will be loaded when pyscf was imported.
  In this way, you don't have to use the python virtual environment.

Once the extended modules are correctly installed (with any methods shown
above), you can use them as the regular submodules developed inside the pyscf
main branch::

    >>> import pyscf
    >>> from pyscf.semiemprical import MINDO
    >>> mol = pyscf.M(atom='N 0 0 0; N 0 0 1')
    >>> MINDO(mol).run()
